Nobody, least of all humans themselves, had any inkling that their descendants
would one day walk on the moon, split the atom, fathom the genetic code and
write history books. The most important thing to know about prehistoric humans
is that they were insigni cant animals with no more impact on their environment
than gorillas, fireflies or jellyfish.
Biologists classify organisms into species. Animals are said to belong to the
same species if they tend to mate with each other, giving birth to fertile o spring.
Horses and donkeys have a recent common ancestor and share many physical
traits. But they show little sexual interest in one another. They will mate if
induced to do so – but their o spring, called mules, are sterile. Mutations in
donkey DNA can therefore never cross over to horses, or vice versa. The two types
of animals are consequently considered two distinct species, moving along
separate evolutionary paths. By contrast, a bulldog and a spaniel may look very
di erent, but they are members of the same species, sharing the same DNA pool.
They will happily mate and their puppies will grow up to pair o with other dogs
and produce more puppies.
Species that evolved from a common ancestor are bunched together under the
heading ‘genus’ (plural genera). Lions, tigers, leopards and jaguars are di erent
species within the genus Panthera. Biologists label organisms with a two-part Latin
name, genus followed by species. Lions, for example, are called Panthera leo, the
species leo of the genus Panthera. Presumably, everyone reading this book is a
Homo sapiens – the species sapiens (wise) of the genus Homo (man).
Genera in their turn are grouped into families, such as the cats (lions, cheetahs,
house cats), the dogs (wolves, foxes, jackals) and the elephants (elephants,
mammoths, mastodons). All members of a family trace their lineage back to a
founding matriarch or patriarch. All cats, for example, from the smallest house
kitten to the most ferocious lion, share a common feline ancestor who lived about
25 million years ago.
Homo sapiens, too, belongs to a family. This banal fact used to be one of
history’s most closely guarded secrets. Homo sapiens long preferred to view itself
as set apart from animals, an orphan bereft of family, lacking siblings or cousins,
and most importantly, without parents. But that’s just not the case. Like it or not,
we are members of a large and particularly noisy family called the great apes.
Our closest living relatives include chimpanzees, gorillas and orang-utans. The
chimpanzees are the closest. Just 6 million years ago, a single female ape had two
daughters. One became the ancestor of all chimpanzees, the other is our own
grandmother.